---
author: admin
layout: post
title: "A Survival Guide for Students Starting an MS in Bioinformatics"
date: 2021-09-29
published: true
---

I'd been toying with the idea of making a survival guide for my students for a
few semesters for, and I decided to actually sit down and do it this time. It's
written based on my experience in the MS program where I now teach the
introductory course. While it's written with students going into a particular
Bioinformatics MS program in mind, I suspect the lessons apply to a lot of
programs. I also imagine a lot of it would apply to a more general data science
student as well, and a few things that could be handy for grad students in
other fields. I could be wrong but I decided to run it up the flag pole in case
it's useful to anyone else. Learn from my biffs and triumphs.

___

# Stuff I learned doing an MS in Bioinformatics (besides Bioinformatics).

This is a survival guide I've been meaning to make for my first semester
students.

## You are not an imposter

It's sometimes intimidating to be around the kind of people you meet in the
Boston biotech scene. It's a bustling, affluent area packed with hugely
successful companies, top schools, and really smart, driven people.

It's important to keep in mind you're not the only regular person who doesn't
get it in a sea of geniuses. Nobody is as sharp as they are at their best all
the time - you can be a famous professor and still spill coffee on stuff and
start talking in a zoom meeting without turning on your microphone all the
time.

Even the biggest rock stars started somewhere, and it's more likely they got
where they are by making the most of the opportunities they had, working in a
persistent, intelligent way, and getting a little lucky than by being a magical
genius you could never hope to comprehend.

Success is not guaranteed but keep in mind that you wouldn't be here if the
committee didn't think you had a strong chance to hang in the scene.

### A note on 'math people'

Math has been terrifying bio people from time immemorial (and now they have
code to deal with too). I was far from a math person, having struggled in
undergrad, feeling as though the "why" was missing from the content, before
eventually forcing my way into decent standing. The stats used in
bioinformatics tend to come from practical concerns, so the "why" is easier to
see. It's still hard sometimes (you're never really done learning), but it's
gone from something I dreaded to something I can use practically and enjoy, and
I find it's one of the main ways I contribute to my team now. The bottom line
is that not feeling like a 'math person' doesn't rule you out of a productive
career for a few reasons:

1) (Bio)statistics is a quirky subfield of math - you can't necessarily assume
that having a tough time in trig is going to translate to a tough time here.
2) You can make computers do the grunt work so you can focus on the concepts.
We often use code libraries for statistical procedures. **This doesn't mean you
can stop trying to understand what is happening** but it does mean you can be
effective without remembering what every Greek character in a formula stands
for. It also means there are fewer errors along the lines of "Drat, I forgot to
carry the 1". Understanding what is an appropriate statistical procedure for
your situation (or knowing when you don't know, and where to look to find out)
is more important than being able to write out matrix multiplication by hand.

When I was finishing my MS I took a PhD level stats course in each of my final
terms, getting an A and a B while working at a co-op full time. I'm still
waiting to feel like a "math person". I'm *not*, however, waiting to be able to
make meaningful contributions in my lab.

### Bioinformatics is hard

I'm not saying most people think this field is a cake-walk or anything, but
it's easy to forget just what we have to juggle.  You'll eventually be expected
to know a lot of what a statistician knows, a lot of what a biologist knows,
and a lot of what a software developer knows. You don't have to be a stats whiz
to see the numbers get a little concerning here. It's normal to come across
something you're not familiar with (or don't remember well) and to look it up.
Which brings me to...

## Adopt the mindset of a perpetual student

You might think of yourself as a bioinformatics apprentice now. In a way, if
you succeed in the field, you'll be one for the rest of your life (or at least
your career). There is just too much to know. 

### Your job is to be good at learning stuff now

For my first publication, my contribution to the paper was co-writing an app in
a language I'd never used before. What's interesting about this is actually how
uninteresting it is - this kind of thing happens all the time. Some people say
"I'm starting a new project, time to learn a new technology!" and are only half
joking. Stay open minded about learning new stuff and get used to **searching
and reading documentation carefully**. The is true for the biological and
statistical aspects of the field as well - new methods and findings are being
reported all the time. 

### Aggressively pursue mentorship 

One important factor to consider when looking at jobs and co-ops is the
availability of a
[mentor](https://www.ted.com/talks/atul_gawande_want_to_get_great_at_something_get_a_coach#t-65625).
This is so important to me that when offered a transfer to a new department in
my work, I told them my acceptance was contingent on them finding me a biostats
mentor. Ask about who you'll be able to go to when you get stuck, or who will
help you learn the job. It doesn't have to be one person either - in a field
like this you might have somebody you got to to for help with biology concepts
and someone else for code. This is fine, just make sure you know these people
exist and that you'll be able to access some of their time. If offered two
jobs, one at the most famous institution on earth with an unavailable grouch,
and one somewhere you've never heard of with someone who cares about teaching,
take the second one. You can get fancy later - get good first, and it will be
easier. 

### Read

Grad school is very concentrated in terms of acquiring new information, which
is part of the point. However, our field is composed of a lot of nitpicky
details - programming minutia, subtle statistical distinctions, complex
biological pathways. This isn't even to mention the technical processes of
sequencing itself. It's easy to miss the big picture. Reading [this
book](https://www.veryshortintroductions.com/view/10.1093/actrade/9780198786207.001.0001/actrade-9780198786207)
helped me see the forest through the trees (and I find myself reviewing
sections). Review-style papers in scientific journals also help catch you up on
a topic at a high level. Additionally, take some time to read articles on
biology, medicine, and computation that appear in quality magazines and attend
talks that strike your interest (you'll probably have a chance to do so at a
lof of companies, and will be bombarded with invites at most academic
institutions).

### Ask questions

It can sometimes be anxiety-inducing to ask a question, especially if you think
it's a basic one. I know I felt this way sometimes (and still do). It's usually
worth it though, and more often than not, in my experience, people aren't going
to give you a hard time about it. 

## Treat co-op like a real job

Co-ops vary in their scope and responsibility so it's not always clear how much
of a chance to run with your own project you'll have. Either way, make the most
of the networking opportunities and dive into whatever task your given - you
never know if it will lead to jobs or more learning opportunities. 

### Consider not taking classes during co-op if it's paid

If your co-op pays you enough to live on, consider making it your complete
professional focus. I was a TA while on co-op but, at least for me, that was
easier than taking a difficult class. The time where I was taking really
difficult coursework and working was very demanding. I feel I could have been a
better student and worker if it was spread out better. 

## Mingle

One of the biggest benefits of grad school is the networking. Introduce
yourself to other people and treated them respectfully. The people you meet,
both faculty and classmates, can inform you about job opportunities and become
future coworkers, friends, or collaborators (all of these have happened to me).

## Be intentional with your time and energy

### Get organized

Develop a consistent way of capturing and organizing tasks. It doesn't matter
what it is, it doesn't have to be perfect, and it doesn't have to be set it
stone, but it does need to exist. Find something that works and tweak it as
needed. The same goes for planning your days and weeks - do not make a habit of
reacting to your day or you'll be on your heels, stressed, and doing less than
your best work for the next 2-3 years.

### Get good

The most important book I've ever read is called [So Good They Can't Ignore
you](https://www.calnewport.com/books/so-good/) by [Cal
Newport](https://www.calnewport.com/), who got famous by being good at the kind
of things people do in grad school. I read it in 2012 and I still consider the
ideas in it when making all my career decisions. Consider reading it, or find a
detailed summary.

#### Practice

This might seen obvious but is easy to overlook - learning new languages,
programming or otherwise, requires practice. Passive consumption of material is
often needed to start a new skill but you won't ever get good enough to hire
without pushing yourself to new levels by enacting what you know in a repeated,
focused way. There is nothing wrong with repeating exercises that still
challenge you. Don't look at coding like collecting information you need to
know, think of it as practicing for a recital. In the internet age, simply
knowing stuff takes a back seat to being able to do something with what you
know to an even greater degree because most information is a search away. 

### Focus

Doing well at things that are hard generally requires focus and skill. Grad
school is hard (in and of itself) and so are the individual things you will do.
Make time to really dive into them without interruptions. More on this (another
key book for me) is [here](https://www.calnewport.com/books/deep-work/), also
from Newport.

#### Multitasking is, by and large, a myth

["Multitasking" on substantive mental work is not
real](https://qz.com/722661/neuroscientists-say-multitasking-literally-drains-the-energy-reserves-of-your-brain/).
What people think of as multitasking is just switching between tasks in
alternation. This costs more energy than doing two things one at a time. Your
mental energy is perhaps the most valuable currency you have in terms of
getting graduate-level work done - don't pay extra taxes on it when you don't
need to.

#### Use social media thoughtfully 

Social media apps are an attempt, by some of the most world's most successful
companies, [to take your attention away from where you intended to put
it](https://slate.com/technology/2017/11/facebook-was-designed-to-be-addictive-does-that-make-it-evil.html).
They are [deliberately
designed](https://www.amazon.com/Hooked-How-Build-Habit-Forming-Products/dp/1591847788),
using the [same psychological principles that went into the slot
machine](https://ihpi.umich.edu/news/social-media-copies-gambling-methods-create-psychological-cravings),
to produce addictive behaviors and maximize the time you spend on them. This
principle is in direct tension with working intentionally and focusing on
difficult material. It's hard to find two hours a day, but that's how much time
[most Americans spend on social
media](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33006940/). The cost of this is greater
if it makes it harder to focus even when you're not on it (by training your
brain to stop what it's doing and look for a reward). I'm not saying using them
has no benefits or that they will turn you into a zombie, but it's worth being
intentional about how you engage with them, attempting to get [the benefits of
socializing with minimal
drawbacks](https://www.huffpost.com/entry/how-much-time-on-social-media_n_5be9c148e4b0783e0a1a8281).
For me this looks like checking the platform I like one or twice a day in a
browser for a few minutes, but not having it on a mobile device during the work
week. The 30 seconds I spend installing it and logging in on Saturdays are
nothing next to the mental health and productivity benefits I felt after using
it on my terms, not the terms of the people who profit from me (why would they
have my best interest in mind?). Some people might be fine with their habits
as-is and what works is personal, so experiment if you feel the need to - you
can read more about this kind of thing
[here](https://www.calnewport.com/books/digital-minimalism/).

### Get stuck as soon as possible

This might sound weird, but when you're working on an assignment, think of your
job as getting stuck as soon as possible. When you're planning your work,
assume you will get stuck and need to wait on a reply from a (probably very
busy) classmate, TA, or instructor. Getting as far as you can as soon as you
can helps you get things in on time and also make it easier to help you - if
we're sending a rushed reply or trying to squeeze in a meeting, we're not going
to have as much time to get into the material in detail. I'm not saying you
can't ask for help as things get closer to being due, just that it's a better
experience for both parties if you start early enough to know if you need a
hand.

## Take care of yourself

### Sleep

I once asked one of my undergrad professors for advice on becoming a better
student. He is a really smart dude - he had a seemingly inexhaustible knowledge
of cell and molecular bio, could lecture beautifully for hours from a single
page of notes, and had published as a post-doc at a top university. I assumed
he had some workflow that I could never dream up. I was surprised by the
simplicity of his answer when he told me he wished he slept more during school.
He felt he would have retained more information. Even the highest performers
answer to their physiology. I'm not saying I made it though grad school without
a few all-nighters (or real late nights), especially balancing a job for most
of it. But they were rare. Prevent as many as you can by being strategic.

### Maintain a compartment for your life

Grad school is great at invading your life. I found though, that by planning
carefully and focusing hard, I didn't have to give up everything. If playing
board games with your friends on the weekend is what gets you through the day,
plan around it. You're probably going to take a few hits in terms of what you
have the time and energy for, but, with care, your outlets can take care of
you, if you take care of them.

### Ask for help

If you're struggling personally, [help is
available](https://www.northeastern.edu/uhcs/counseling-services/) and you
should use it. Grad school is hard enough without leaving help on the table.

## You're a quant now

Congrats, nerd. 

### Take statistics seriously (and early)

A lot of work in our field is *executed* by code but *motivated* by statistics.
I personally loved learning to code (and still do) - I love stats too, but it
was less intuitive to get started. Code will sometimes tell you when you're
wrong with an error or a warning - a statistical test will not, silently
letting you draw bogus conclusions. Thus, it pays to take it seriously, not
just a means to and end. Give these classes the attention they deserve, and...

### Consider a data science elective (DA5020/5030)

There is statistics in the program, but it's an important thing and there is
too much to learn in one semester. Additionally, these additional courses may
also expose you to the nuts and bolts of getting datasets in out of a database
and messing around with them, which isn't always covered in more theoretical
stats courses. They may also include "machine learning" related topics in
addition to more "classical" statistics. That being said..

### Machine learning is built on statistical foundations

Please do not be the person who doesn't know what logistic regression is for
but tries to solve every problem using a neural network. It's good to explore,
and neural nets are awesome, so you should learn about them eventually. But
they're made of pieces of statistics - it's been said a neural net is just a
bunch of logistic regressions standing on top of one another in a trench coat -
and you'll want to know what those pieces are. Misunderstanding and net can
lead to sorrow, so be wary of putting the cart before the horse. They are one
one of many tools, all of which have different uses, strengths, and weaknesses
(the drawbacks of a neural nets beyond the scope of this article but are
important enough to look into).

### Learn (make your peace with?) R

The R programming language is notoriously quirky. It's also built from the
ground up to eat statistics of basically any complexity for breakfast. The
phrases I've uttered in painstakingly becoming a proficient R users would make
a British soccer (er, football) fan blush. In fact, I learned it only because I
was tricked and forced into doing so by an out-of-date course description that
promised me sweet, beautiful Python. I was pretty salty at the time, but this
is easily the best annoying thing that ever happened to my career. People all
over the place are just waiting to blow up the slack channel asking you for
plots, and R is galaxy-class tool for getting them the goods. A few things:

#### You won't escape R for differential expression, and lots of people are going to ask you to do this for them.

Look up [sleuth](https://pachterlab.github.io/sleuth/),
[limma-voom](https://ucdavis-bioinformatics-training.github.io/2018-June-RNA-Seq-Workshop/thursday/DE.html),
and
[DESeq2](http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/devel/bioc/vignettes/DESeq2/inst/doc/DESeq2.html)
if you think this these experiments are coming your way on co-op. If it's not
obvious which is right for the experiment, I go for limma-voom.

#### Use the tidyverse

[This](https://www.tidyverse.org/) is essentially a dialect of R at this point.
Using tidyverse R vs "base" R is the kind of thing people fight on twitter or
get ideological about, but ignore that. It's more practical to start with the
tidyverse for most people (way less quirky and obtuse, extremely well
documented). `dplyr` and `ggplot2` should be among the first components you
learn.

#### Check your types

Do this in any language, but especially R. Part of why makes R weird is the
"type system" it uses, so read up on how to check what types are in your
dataframe (`class`, and similar functions). Read about the `factor` type. We
can talk more about R later - let me know if you're interested, but I'm pushing
it in terms of the scope of this article already.


## Misc: On being noticed, being practical, and not shooting yourself in the foot (at least not too often, or without meaning to)

### Git is part of your life now

Using version control (which is usually git) is now part of being a functioning
adult for you. If you're writing anything that's bigger than a throw-away,
one-off script, make it into a git repo (I made one just for this article). If
you're not yet experienced enough to tell if it's a throw-away, one-off script,
put it in git just in case. If you think you're experienced enough to tell, you
might be mistaken, so it couldn't hurt to put it into git anyway. Commit and
push your work all the time. It's difficult to overstate the importance of
version control to a good workflow. Think of it like backing up the data on
your phone, except that you can instantly go back to every version of your
data. And make "branches" of your data where you try and save different things
in different ways, so two or more working versions can exist. And, if you like
one version better, you can make it the new official version. Or merge them
both into one. Or send it to a friend, and have them make a version, which will
exist without messing with your version. I once needed to exactly recreate a
plot of randomly partitioned data from 6 months prior for the VP of Data
Science at my co-op. I'd forgotten how I did it and deleted the code from my
computer. If I hadn't been using git carefully, I'd have been toast. **If
you're on a project of non-trivial size or importance and someone tells you
that you don't need version control, it should feel like they just told you "I
don't need to brush my teeth".**

`UPDATE:` A while back I made a video of a very simple git workflow. You can
check it out [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jEmMI3tFlsc).

### Read the error message, then paste it into a search engine

Seriously, the degree to which this will make your life easier is almost
absurd. You're going to be seeing error messages in several languages
throughout the semester and many more in your career. This is where a lot of
your time blocks will come from. If the code is syntactically incorrect, it
simply won't run, and there is no way to know if it will take you ten seconds
or ten hours to fix it. Luckily, I learned this early on when I took an error I
had to a TA and he simply copied out of my terminal and into a search bar. A
post on how to fix it was in the first few results. **The internet is bursting
with people who want to know why their code is broken, and there are many
forums of questions with answers to common questions. Get used to navigating
them.**

### If a post bails you out, bookmark it

Getting stuck is a pain. Getting stuck on something you've been stuck on before
but can't recall how to fix is a *huge* pain. Bookmark or clip posts that save
your butt.

### Use a virtual machine or spare laptop if you want to tinker with a Linux system

I found it fun to explore Linux - different software, distros (I use Arch BTW),
and desktop environments, and so on. However, if you tell a Linux terminal to
do something insane, and you have the authority to do so, it will listen to
you. Sometimes this leads to a learning experience such as "Hmm, why is my
desktop gone?" (true story) or "Hey, GRUB is broken and my computer boots to a
black screen and flashing white cursor, what do I do now?" (true story 3+
times). If you want to break stuff and learn to fix it, that's awesome, just
don't do it on the machine you're taking a final on tomorrow. 

### Make something

It's nice to have a portfolio, hosted somewhere like GitHub, where you can show
off things you've made. If you do a creative final project, clean it up and put
it somewhere public so you can flex for future employers. I also found it fun
to do
[coding](https://github.com/thadryanjs/Portfolio/blob/master/Bioinformatics/ASH/documentation/ASH_demo.pdf)
or [data](https://pythoninthewyld.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/Main.nb_.html)
projects on random things I found interesting, and to show those off too. This
will set you apart from those who can only show homework they did. You can look
at my [site](https://thadryanjs.github.io/) or
[portfolio](https://github.com/thadryanjs/Portfolio) for a sense of what these
might look like, but don't be afraid to do you own thing.
